#summary Advanced features of the JSR 311 plugin for Grails.
#labels Featured

<wiki:toc/>

=Domain objects=

Grails domain classes can be used in resource method signatures out-of-the box. The grails-jaxrs plugin is able to convert domain object arguments or return values from and to XML and JSON representations. These conversions are done by dedicated domain object providers (TODO: insert link). This section gives some examples how to use domain classes in resource methods.

==Single domain objects==

Let's assume there's a {{{Person}}} domain class and an {{{update}}} resource method  that responds to HTTP PUT operations. The {{{Person}}} domain class has two properties {{{firstName}}} and {{{lastName}}}.

{{{
class Person {
    String firstName
    String lastName
}
}}}

The {{{update}}} method is a member of the {{{PersonResource}}} class and 

  * defines a {{{Person}}} parameter for receiving {{{Person}}} data from a client
  * defines a {{{Person}}} return type for sending {{{Person}}} data to the client.
  * has annotations that constrain valid {{{Person}}} representation formats to {{{application/xml}}} or {{{application/json}}}.

{{{
import javax.ws.rs.Consumes
import javax.ws.rs.Produces
import javax.ws.rs.PUT

class PersonResource {
        
    @PUT
    @Consumes(['application/xml','application/json'])
    @Produces(['application/xml','application/json'])
    Person update(Person person) {
        Person result = ... // make some database changes
        return result
    }

    // ...

}
}}}

Depending on the {{{Content-Type}}} request header the client either send an XML representation

{{{
PUT /hello/api/person/1 HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/xml
Accept: application/xml
Host: localhost:8080
Content-Length: 82

<person>
  <firstName>Sam</firstName>
  <lastName>Hill</lastName>
</person>
}}}

or a JSON representation

{{{
PUT /hello/api/person/2 HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json
Accept: application/json
Host: localhost:8080
Content-Length: 58

{"class":"Person","firstName":"Fabien","lastName":"Barel"}
}}}

In both cases the plugin binds the representation to the {{{Person}}} parameter of the {{{update}}} method. The representation of the response entity depends on the {{{Accept}}} request header. If the client sends an {{{Accept=application/xml}}} request header, the {{{Person}}} object returned from the {{{update}}} method is converted to XML. With an {{{Accept=application/json}}} request header, a conversion to JSON is done.

Instead of declaring a {{{Person}}} return type one could also declare a {{{javax.ws.rs.core.Response}}} return type and set the response entity during the response building process.

{{{
    @PUT
    @Consumes(['application/xml','application/json'])
    @Produces(['application/xml','application/json'])
    Response update(Person person) {
        Person result = ... // make some database changes
        return Response.ok(result)
    }
}}}

This gives better control over e.g. response header creation and still allows clients to do content negotiation.

==Domain object collections==

The grails-jaxrs plugin can also handle domain object collections that are returned from resource methods. In the following example, the resource method returns a list of all {{{Person}}} objects in the database.

{{{
import java.util.List
import javax.ws.rs.GET
import javax.ws.rs.Produces
import javax.ws.rs.Path

@Path('/api/person')
class PersonCollectionResource {

    @GET
    @Produces(['application/xml','application/json'])
    List<Person> readAll() {
        Person.findAll()
    }

    // ...

}
}}}

Depending on the {{{Accept}}} request header either an XML or JSON representation is returned. The generic return type ({{{List<Person>}}}) makes it explicit which domain objects are contained in the collection, but one could equally write.

{{{
    @GET
    @Produces(['application/xml','application/json'])
    List readAll() {
        Person.findAll()
    }
}}}

or 

{{{
    @GET
    @Produces(['application/xml','application/json'])
    def readAll() {
        Person.findAll()
    }
}}}

The plugin's domain object writer (TODO: insert link), however, can be configured to only convert domain objects returned from methods that declare a generic collection return type by adding the following line to {{{grails-app/conf/Config.groovy}}}: 

{{{
org.grails.jaxrs.dowriter.require.generic.collections
}}}

This is useful in situations when there are resource methods that return collections that contain object other than Grails domain objects. Alternatively, one could disable (TODO: insert link) the plugin's domain object writer completely and write a custom one (TODO: insert link).

As with resource methods that return single domain objects, one can also declare a {{{javax.ws.rs.core.Response}}} return type and set the domain object collection as response entity.

{{{
    @GET
    @Produces(['application/xml','application/json'])
    Response readAll() {
        Response.ok(Person.findAll())
    }
}}}

Using domain object collections for method parameters is not supported (yet).

=Configuration=

==URL mappings==

When the grails-jaxrs plugin is installed, requests paths matching {{{/api/**}}} are forwarded to a {{{JaxrsController}}} which is part of the plugin. This default URL mapping can be changed via the {{{org.grails.jaxrs.url.mappings}}} configuration property in {{{grails-app/conf/Config.groovy}}}. For example, setting this property to 

  * {{{org.grails.jaxrs.url.mappings=['/abc', '/xyz']}}}

will create the following URL mappings for the {{{JaxrsController}}}:

  * {{{"/abc"(controller:"jaxrs")}}}
  * {{{"/abc/**"(controller:"jaxrs")}}}
  * {{{"/xyz"(controller:"jaxrs")}}}
  * {{{"/xyz/**"(controller:"jaxrs")}}}

{{{@Path}}} annotation values in JAX-RS resource classes must be set accordingly e.g. 

{{{
@Path('/abc/test1')
class TestResource1 {
  ...    
}
}}}

or 

{{{
@Path('/xyz/test2')
class TestResource2 {
  ...    
}
}}}

Custom mappings replace the default {{{/api/**}}} mapping. If the default mapping should apply in addition to custom mappings it must be added to the {{{org.grails.jaxrs.url.mappings}}} list.

  * {{{org.grails.jaxrs.url.mappings=['/abc', '/xyz', '/api']}}}

==JAX-RS implementation==

The grails-jaxrs plugin allows to choose between [https://jersey.dev.java.net/ Jersey] (version 1.1.4.1) and [http://www.restlet.org/ Restlet] (version 2.0-M6) as JAX-RS implementations. By default, Jersey is used. If you want to use Restlet instead, add the following line to {{{grails-app/conf/Config.groovy}}}.

{{{
org.grails.jaxrs.provider.name='restlet'
}}}

Restlet was added because it supports deployments to [http://code.google.com/appengine/ Google App Engine] (GAE). For instructions how to deploy a grails-jaxrs application to Google App Engine refer to the [#Google_App_Engine Google App Engine] section. 

The main obstacle for deploying Jersey to Google App Engine was missing support for JAXB in the past. This has been resolved with the App Engine SDK 1.2.8. However, attempts to deploy Jersey to Google App Engine revealed other issues. We plan to resolve these issues in upcoming versions of this plugin.

==JAX-RS resource scope==

By default, JAX-RS resource classes are instantiated with every request which corresponds to the following entry in {{{grails-app/conf/Config.groovy}}}.

{{{
org.grails.jaxrs.resource.scope='prototype'
}}}

Since this is the default you can omit this entry as well. On the other hand, if you want that your JAX-RS resources are singletons, add the following configuration entry.

{{{
org.grails.jaxrs.resource.scope='singleton'
}}}

==Domain object providers==

From version 0.3 onwards the grails-jaxrs plugin comes with JAX-RS providers for converting between Grails domain objects and XML/JSON representations. Domain object providers are explained in detail in the [#Entity_providers entity providers] section. Here, only the configuration options are summarized. The grails-jaxrs plugin comes with two domain object providers:

  * {{{org.grails.jaxrs.provider.DomainObjectReader}}}
  * {{{org.grails.jaxrs.provider.DomainObjectWriter}}}

These can selectively be disabled by using the following configuration properties in {{{grails-app/conf/Config.groovy}}}.

  * {{{org.grails.jaxrs.doreader.disable}}}
  * {{{org.grails.jaxrs.dowriter.disable}}}

Setting these properties to {{{true}}} will disable the default domain object providers. Another {{{DomainObjectWriter}}} configuration option, {{{org.grails.jaxrs.dowriter.require.generic.collections}}} is explained in the [#Entity_providers entity providers] section.

=Applying filters=

[http://grails.org/doc/1.1.2/guide/6.%20The%20Web%20Layer.html#6.6%20Filters Grails filters] can be applied to JAX-RS resources as well. For example, to add a filter for the {{{/api/test/**}}} URL pattern, create a file {{{TestFilters.groovy}}} under {{{grails-app/conf}}} with a content like

{{{
class TestFilters {

    def filters = {
            
        testUris(uri:'/api/test/**') {
            before = {
                // do some preprocessing
            }
            after = {
                // do some postprocessing
            }
            
        }   
    }
}
}}}

=Service injection=

Services can be auto-injected into resource and [#Entity_providers provider] objects by name. Assuming we have a service class named {{{TestService.groovy}}} in {{{grails-app/services}}}

{{{
class TestService {

     String greet(String name) {
         'Hello ' + (name ? name : 'unknown')
     }
    
}
}}}

then we can auto-inject it by defining a {{{testService}}} property like in the following resource class.

{{{
// imports omitted ...

@Path('/api/test')
class TestResource {

    def testService // injected
    
    @GET
    @Produces('text/plain')
    String getTestRepresentation(@QueryParam('name') String name) {
        testService.greet(name)
    }
    
}
}}}

=Scaffolding=

The grails-jaxrs plugin supports scaffolding. Please note that the scaffolding feature in version 0.3 is still *early access*. For an introductory scaffolding example refer to the [GettingStarted#Scaffolding scaffolding section of the getting started guide]. The following subsections walk through the generated example code. 

=={{{PersonCollectionResource.groovy}}}==

Here's the source code for {{{PersonCollectionResource.groovy}}}.

{{{
import static org.grails.jaxrs.response.Responses.*

import javax.ws.rs.Consumes
import javax.ws.rs.GET
import javax.ws.rs.Produces
import javax.ws.rs.Path
import javax.ws.rs.PathParam
import javax.ws.rs.POST
import javax.ws.rs.core.Response

@Path('/api/person')
@Consumes(['application/xml','application/json'])
@Produces(['application/xml','application/json'])
class PersonCollectionResource {

    @POST
    Response create(Person dto) {
        created dto.save()
    }

    @GET
    Response readAll() {
        ok Person.findAll()
    }
    
    @Path('/{id}')
    PersonResource getResource(@PathParam('id') String id) {
        new PersonResource(id:id)
    }
        
}
}}}

It is based based on JSR 311 classes and annotations and uses static methods from {{{org.grails.jaxrs.response.Responses}}}. This is a helper class provided by the plugin that implements a very simple DSL consisting of elements {{{created}}} and {{{ok}}}. Supported content types for requests and responses are {{{application/xml}}} and ´{{{application/json}}}. This is given by the class-level {{{@Consumes}}} and {{{@Produces}}} annotations.

The {{{PersonCollectionResource}}} class responds to HTTP operations that are releated to person lists. The URL of the person list is {{{http://localhost:8080/hello/api/person}}} where the {{{/api/person}}} path is defined by the class-level {{{@Path('/api/person')}}} annotation. 

  * The {{{create}}} method responds to POST requests by storing a new {{{Person}}} object in the database using [http://grails.org/doc/1.1.2/guide/5.%20Object%20Relational%20Mapping%20(GORM).html GORM]. The XML or JSON request entity is converted by the plugin to a {{{Person}}} domain object and passed to the method via the {{{dto}}} parameter. The conversion is done by the {{{org.grails.jaxrs.provider.DomainObjectReader}}}, a JAX-RS provider implemented by the plugin. The persisted domain object is passed to the {{{created}}} method which creates a response from it using the JAX-RS API. Here's a [http://grails-jaxrs.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/jaxrs/src/groovy/org/grails/jaxrs/response/Responses.groovy link to the source code]. The method constructs a {{{URI}}} for the {{{Location}}} response header from the domain object id. The {{{Person}}} object, which is the {{{Response}}} entity, is converted to an XML or JSON representation, depending on the {{{Accept}}} HTTP request header. The conversion is done by the {{{org.grails.jaxrs.provider.DomainObjectWriter}}}.
  * The {{{readAll}}} method responds to GET requests and returns an XML or JSON representation of a person list. Again we use GORM to get all person objects from the database and pass that list as argument to the {{{ok}}} method. This method uses the JAX-RS API to create a response. Here's a [http://grails-jaxrs.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/jaxrs/src/groovy/org/grails/jaxrs/response/Responses.groovy link to the source code].
  * The {{{getResource}}} method creates another JAX-RS resource whenever a request to the URI template {{{http://localhost:8080/hello/api/person/{id} }}} is made. The {{{id}}} path parameter in the template is bound to the {{{id}}} parameter of the {{{getResource}}} method. The created JAX-RS {{{PersonResource}}} is then used by the JAX-RS runtime to handle the request to the person with the given id. 

=={{{PersonResource.groovy}}}==

Here's the source code for {{{PersonResource.groovy}}}.

{{{
import static org.grails.jaxrs.response.Responses.*

import javax.ws.rs.Consumes
import javax.ws.rs.DELETE
import javax.ws.rs.GET
import javax.ws.rs.Produces
import javax.ws.rs.PUT
import javax.ws.rs.core.Response

import org.grails.jaxrs.provider.DomainObjectNotFoundException

@Consumes(['application/xml','application/json'])
@Produces(['application/xml','application/json'])
class PersonResource {
    
    def id
    
    @GET
    Response read() {
        def obj = Person.get(id)
        if (!obj) {
            throw new DomainObjectNotFoundException(Person.class, id)
        }
        ok obj
    }
    
    @PUT
    Response update(Person dto) {
        def obj = Person.get(id)
        if (!obj) {
            throw new DomainObjectNotFoundException(Person.class, id)
        }
        obj.properties = dto.properties 
        ok obj
    }
    
    @DELETE
    void delete() {
        def obj = Person.get(id)
        if (obj) { 
            obj.delete()
        }
    }
    
}
}}}

The {{{id}}} property is set during construction of the resource and is used for database operations. This class implements the methods {{{read}}}, {{{update}}} and {{{delete}}} to handle GET, PUT and DELETE requests, respectivly. It also uses GORM for database operations and relies on helper methods of {{{org.grails.jaxrs.response.Responses}}} to create repsonses via the JAX-RS API.

If there's no person with given {{{id}}} in the database, a {{{DomainObjectNotFoundException}}} is thrown. This exception class generates a custom {{{404}}} response using the JAX-RS API ([http://grails-jaxrs.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/jaxrs/src/groovy/org/grails/jaxrs/provider/DomainObjectNotFoundException.groovy see source code for details]).

=Using GORM=

*Hint*: the example described in this section can be implemented much easier using [#Scaffolding Scaffolding]. Most of the code presented here can be generated since version 0.2 of grails-jaxrs. The following example nevertheless provides useful information how to implement simple RESTful service interfaces by hand (i.e. without code generation).

Usage of [http://grails.org/doc/1.1.2/guide/5.%20Object%20Relational%20Mapping%20(GORM).html GORM] is demonstrated on a (over-simplified) web application that keeps track of notes that have been POSTed via HTTP.

  * POSTing to {{{http://localhost:8080/hello/api/notes}}} creates a new {{{Note}}} domain object in the database containing the actual note from the request entity. The request content type is {{{text/plain}}}. The response entity contains a representation of the created {{{Note}}} object. The response content type is {{{application/xml}}} or {{{application/json}}} depending on the {{{Accept}}} request header. The {{{Location}}} response header value is the URL of the created note resource.

  * GETing from {{{http://localhost:8080/hello/api/notes}}} obtains a list of all created notes so far or an empty list. The response content type is {{{application/xml}}} or {{{application/json}}} depending on the {{{Accept}}} request header. 

  * GETing from {{{http://localhost:8080/hello/api/notes/{id} }}} obtains a note with a certain {{{id}}} or an error message (along with status code 404) if a note with the given {{{id}}} doesn't exist.

The first step is to create the {{{Note}}} domain object. This can be either done via {{{grails create-domain-class note}}} from the command line or manually by adding a {{{Note.groovy}}} file with the following content to the {{{grails-app/domain}}} directory.

{{{
class Note {

    static constraints = {
    }
    
    String text
    
}
}}}

The only thing a note object stores is the note {{{text}}} (and an {{{id}}} property that is available on every Grails domain object). For inserting new {{{Note}}} objects into the database, we create a {{{NotesResource}}} class that can handle POST requests to {{{http://localhost:8080/hello/api/notes}}}.

{{{
import javax.ws.rs.Consumes
import javax.ws.rs.GET
import javax.ws.rs.Produces
import javax.ws.rs.Path
import javax.ws.rs.PathParam
import javax.ws.rs.POST
import javax.ws.rs.core.Response
import javax.ws.rs.core.UriBuilder

@Path('/api/notes')
class NotesResource {

     @POST
     @Consumes('text/plain')
     @Produces(['application/xml', 'application/json'])
     Response addNote(String text) {
         def note = new Note(text:text).save()
         URI uri = UriBuilder.fromPath(note.id as String).build()
         Response.created(uri).entity(note).build()
     }

     @GET
     @Produces(['application/xml', 'application/json'])
     Response getNotes() {
         Response.ok(Note.findAll()).build()
     }
     
     // ... other methods omitted
     
}
}}}

Save this class as {{{NotesResource.groovy}}} in the {{{grails-app/resources}}} directory. Let's take a closer look at it. The class-level {{{@Path}}} annotation makes this resource accessible under the {{{/api/notes}}} path i.e. the full URL is {{{http://localhost:8080/hello/api/notes}}}. POSTing to this URL will call the {{{addNote(String)}}} method passing the request entity via the {{{text}}} parameter. This parameter is used to construct a {{{Note}}} object which is then stored in the database. The URL for the newly created note is constructed in the second line. We use this URL to set the {{{Location}}} response header via {{{Response.created(uri)}}}. The response entity is the created note object. The plugin will use a {{{org.grails.jaxrs.provider.DomainObjectWriter}}} to convert the note object to an XML or JSON representation. Here's a sample HTTP request

{{{
POST /hello/notes/ HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: text/plain
Host: localhost:8080
Content-Length: 27

Don't forget to learn Scala
}}}

and the response

{{{
HTTP/1.1 201 Created
Content-Type: application/xml
Location: http://localhost:8080/hello/api/notes/1
Transfer-Encoding: chunked
Server: Jetty(6.1.14)

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<note id="1">
  <text>Don't forget to learn Scala</text>
</note>
}}}

TODO: continue here ...

To obtain a list of all notes send a GET request to {{{http://localhost:8080/hello/notes}}} which will call the {{{getNotes()}}} method. This method again uses the Grails XML converter to create an XML representation of the notes collection, such as 

{{{
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: text/xml

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<list>
  <note id="1">
    <text>Don't forget to learn Scala</text>
  </note>
  <note id="2">
    <text>Another important note</text>
  </note>
</list>
}}}

Finally we want to obtain individual notes via {{{http://localhost:8080/hello/notes/{id} }}} where {{{id}}} is in range 1..n. This can be achieved by adding a {{{getNote(String}}} method to the {{{NotesResource}}} class:

{{{
@Component
@Path('/notes')
class NotesResource {

     // ... other methods omitted

     @Path('/{id}')
     NoteResource getNote(@PathParam('id') String id) {
         new NoteResource(note:Note.get(id))
     }
     
}
}}}

Instead of using a fixed path we use a _path template_ where the last path segment is the variable part of the path. It is bound to the {{{id}}} parameter of the {{{getNote(String)}}} method using a {{{@PathParam}}} annotation. Instead of rendering the response directly in the {{{NotesResource}}} class it is delegated to the {{{NoteResource}}} class after we've loaded the note object from the database:

{{{
import static javax.ws.rs.core.Response.Status.NOT_FOUND
 
import grails.converters.* 
 
import javax.ws.rs.GET
import javax.ws.rs.Produces
import javax.ws.rs.core.Response

class NoteResource {

    Note note

    @GET
    @Produces('text/xml')
    Response getNote() {
        if (note) {
            Response.ok(note as XML).build()
        } else {
            Response.status(NOT_FOUND).entity('<error>not found</error>').build()
        } 
    }
    
}
}}}

If a note object with the requested id exists an XML representation is returned, otherwise, an error message is created along with a status code 404 (NOT FOUND). For example, GETing the note {{{http://localhost:8080/hello/notes/1}}} returns

{{{
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: text/xml

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<note id="1">
  <text>Don't forget to learn Scala</text>
</note>
}}}

=Entity providers=

Entity providers supply mapping services between representations and their associated Java types. They are used to factor out parsing and rendering code from resource classes. The {{{grails-jaxrs}}} plugin provides abstract base classes for entity providers. 

  * {{{org.grails.jaxrs.support.MessageBodyReaderSupport<T>}}}
  * {{{org.grails.jaxrs.support.MessageBodyWriterSupport<T>}}}

These can be used for simple use cases. For example, if you want to use Groovy's markup builder for creating custom XML responses from {{{Note}}} objects (see [#Using_GORM previous] section) implement a {{{NoteWriter}}} provider class like following:

{{{
import groovy.xml.MarkupBuilder

import java.io.OutputStreamWriter

import javax.ws.rs.Produces
import javax.ws.rs.core.MultivaluedMap
import javax.ws.rs.ext.Provider

import org.grails.jaxrs.support.MessageBodyWriterSupport

@Provider
@Produces('text/xml')
class NoteWriter extends MessageBodyWriterSupport<Note> {
    
    void writeTo(Note entity, MultivaluedMap httpHeaders, OutputStream entityStream) {
        def builder = new MarkupBuilder(new OutputStreamWriter(entityStream)) 
        builder.note {
            id(entity.id)
            content(entity.text)
        }
        // Alternative (default rendering):
        // entityStream << (entity as XML)
    }
   
}
}}}

When you place that entity provider into the {{{grails-app/providers}}} directory then it is auto-detected by Grails. Having such a provider in place, resource methods can return a {{{Note}}} object directly in the response object:

{{{
...

class NoteResource {

    Note note

    @GET
    @Produces('text/xml')
    Response getNote() {
        if (note) {
            // custom XML rendering done by provider (NoteWriter)
            Response.ok(note).build()
            //Response.ok(note as XML).build()
        } else {
            Response.status(NOT_FOUND).entity('<error>not found</error>').build()
        } 
    }
     
}
}}}

In this case the response looks like:

{{{
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: text/xml

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<note>
  <id>1</id>
  <content>Don't forget to learn Scala</content>
</note>
}}}

=Google App Engine=

This section describes how to get the [GettingStarted#Hello_world hello world] example running on Google App Engine. 

  * Install the [http://grails.org/plugin/app-engine Grails AppEngine plugin].
  * Create a Grails application and JAX-RS resource as described in the [GettingStarted#Hello_world hello world] example.
  * Add the following entries to {{{grails-app/conf/Config.groovy}}}
{{{
org.grails.jaxrs.url.mappings=['/test']
org.grails.jaxrs.provider.name='restlet'
// replace <application-name> with the 
// actual App Engine application name
google.appengine.application='<application-name>'
}}}
  * Open a shell at the root directory of the hello world application.
  * Set the application version to 1 with 
{{{
grails set-version 1
}}}
  * Run the application locally with {{{grails app-engine run}}}.
  * Enter the URL {{{http://localhost:8080/test?name=Tester}}} into your browser and the browser window should display {{{Hello Tester}}}.
  * Package the plugin with {{{grails app-engine package}}}.
  * Deploy the application with the {{{appcfg}}} command-line tool from your [http://code.google.com/appengine/downloads.html App Engine SDK]. 
    * On Linux, enter 
{{{
$APPENGINE_HOME/bin/appcfg.sh update ./target/war
}}}
    * On Windows, enter 
{{{
%APPENGINE_HOME%\bin\appcfg.cmd update .\target\war
}}}
  * When prompted enter email and password to authenticate at Google App Engine.
  * Once deployment is done go enter the URL {{{http://<application-name>.appspot.com/test?name=Tester}}} into your browser and the browser window should display {{{Hello Tester}}}. It may take 10-20 seconds for Google App Engine to initialize the Grails application the first time. Subsequent requests are served much faster.

Deployments of applications that use GORM have not been tested yet but should be possible with the Grails {{{gorm-jpa}}} plugin. In order to use the plugin make sure to choose JPA for persistence when installing the Grails {{{app-engine}}} plugin. Initial tests on Windows resulted in classpath issues after installation of the {{{gorm-jpa}}} plugin. I'll post a message to the [http://groups.google.com/group/grails-jaxrs grails-jaxrs] group as soon as there are updates.