#summary Installation instructions for the JSR 311 plugin for Grails.

<wiki:toc/>

=Prerequisites=

Using the grails-jaxrs plugin requires a Grails 1.1.1 (or higher) installation. For instructions how to download and install Grails refer to the [http://grails.org/doc/1.1.1/guide/2.%20Getting%20Started.html#2.1%20Downloading%20and%20Installing Grails reference documentation section 2.1].

=Getting the plugin= 

*Note:* If you want to install the plugin directly from the [http://www.grails.org/plugin/home Grails Plugin Repository] you can skip this section and go directly to the section [#Installing_the_plugin Installing the plugin].

==Binaries==

The plugin binaries can be downloaded from the project's [http://code.google.com/p/grails-jaxrs/downloads/list download section]. The latest stable version is grails-jaxrs-0.2.zip.

==Sources==

If you want to build the plugin from its sources checkout the code from Subversion with

{{{
svn checkout http://grails-jaxrs.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/jaxrs jaxrs
}}}

and go to the created {{{jaxrs}}} directory. Optionally, run the unit and integration tests by entering 

{{{
grails test-app
}}} 

on the command line. To create a binary package of the plugin enter

{{{
grails package-plugin
}}} 

The filename of the created plugin is {{{grails-jaxrs-<version>.zip}}} where {{{<version>}}} is the current development version. To build older versions of the plugin from its sources use one of the [http://grails-jaxrs.googlecode.com/svn/tags grails-jaxrs tags].

=Installing the plugin= 

If you want to use the grails-jaxrs plugin in a Grails application you need to install it first. The plugin can be either be installed directly from the Grails plugin repository or from a local package that has been download before or built from the sources.

==From the Grails plugin repository==

To install the plugin from the Grails plugin repository go to your project's root directory and enter

{{{
grails install-plugin jaxrs
}}} 

This will install the latest released version of the grails-jaxrs plugin.

==From a local plugin binary==

If you downloaded or built the plugin as described in [#Getting_the_plugin Getting the plugin] go to your project's root directory and enter

{{{
grails install-plugin /path/to/grails-jaxrs-<version>.zip
}}} 

where {{{/path/to}}} needs to be replaced by the absolute or relative path to the {{{grails-jaxrs-<version>.zip}}} file.

=Upgrade notes=

In version 0.2 the way how JAX-RS resources and providers are auto-detected has changed. In version 0.1 plain Spring mechanisms were used ({{{<context:component-scan />}}}, {{{@Component}}} annotation, etc.) whereas in version 0.2 the plugin follows Grails conventions how to detect and manage resources. There's no need any more to provide a custom Spring application context. The grails-jaxrs plugin is now making these changes behind the scenes.

Similar changes have been introduced for injection of other beans into JAX-RS resources and providers. In version 0.1 plain Spring mechanisms were necessary such as the {{{@Autowired}}} annotation whereas in version 0.2 other beans are auto-injected by name as you know it from Grails controllers, for example.

The easiest way to get familiar with these changes is to work through the [GettingStarted getting started guide].